Define iso-recursive type semantics (#243)
WebAssembly/gc: proposals/gc/MVP.md

* `i31ref` is a new reference type
  - `i31ref == (ref i31)`

* `rtt <typeidx>` is a new reference type
  - `(rtt $t) == (ref (rtt $t))`

#### Type Definitions

* `deftype` is the syntax for an entry in the type section, generalising the existing syntax
  - `deftype ::= <subtype> | rec <subtype>*`
  - `module ::= {..., types vec(<deftype>)}`

>   - a `rec` definition defines a group of mutually recursive types that can refer to each other; it thereby defines several type indices at a time

Reviewer: Do we intend to support groups of size 0? It would slightly simplify the Binaryen implementation if we did not.

Author: Ah, good question. Preferably, I'd go with what we do everywhere else in Wasm, which is avoiding special rules for edge cases. How much of a simplification would it be to rule it out?

Reviewer: That's fine. It will mean adding the ability to shrink a `TypeBuilder` in Binaryen, but that's not too complicated.

* `subtype` is a new category of type defining a single type, as a subtype of possible other types
  - `subtype ::= sub <typeidx>* <strtype>`
  - the preexisting syntax with no `sub` clause is redefined to be a shorthand for a `sub` clause with empty `typeidx` list: `<strtype> == sub () <strtype>`

>   - Note: This allows multiple supertypes. For the MVP, it could be restricted to at most one supertype.

Reviewer: Let's change the language from "could be restricted" to "is restricted."

  (type $t1 (struct (field i32 (ref $t2))))
  (type $t2 (struct (field i64 (ref $t1))))
)
```
In the context, these will be recorded as:
```
$t1 = rect1t2.0
$t2 = rect1t2.1

where

rect1t2 = (rec
  (struct (field i32 (ref $t2)))
  (struct (field i64 (ref $t1)))
)
```
That is, the types are defined as projections from their respective recursion group, using their relative inner indices `0` and `1`.

#### Equivalence

Type equivalence, written `t == t'` here, is essentially defined inductively. All rules are simply the canonical congruences, with the exception of the rule for recursive types.

For the purpose of defining recursive type equivalence, type indices are extended with a special form that distinguishes regular from recursive type uses.

* `rec.<i>` is a new form of type index
  - `typeidx ::= ... | rec.<i>`

This form is only used during equivalence checking, to identify and represent "back edges" inside a recursive type. It is merely a technical device for formulating the rules and cannot appear in source code. It is introduced by the following auxiliary meta-function:

* Rolling a context type produces an _iso-recursive_ representation of its underlying recursion group

>   - `tie($t)                    = tie_$t(<ctxtype>)`  iff `$t = <ctxtype>`

Reviewer: Should this be "iff `C($t) = <ctxtype>`" like in the `unroll` and `expand` definitions?

)
```
recorded in the context as
```
$u1 = (rec (struct (field i32 (ref $u2))) (struct (field i64 (ref $u1)))).0
$u2 = (rec (struct (field i32 (ref $u2))) (struct (field i64 (ref $u1)))).1
```
then to check the equivalence `$t1 == $u1`, both types are tied into iso-recursive types first:
```
tie($t1) = (rec (struct (field i32 (ref rec.1))) (struct (field i64 (ref rec.0)))).0
tie($u1) = (rec (struct (field i32 (ref rec.1))) (struct (field i64 (ref rec.0)))).0
```
In this case, it is immediately apparent that these are equivalent types.

Note: In type-theoretic terms, these are higher-kinded iso-recursive types:
```
tie($t1) ~ (mu a. <(struct (field i32 (ref a.1))), (struct i64 (field (ref a.0)))>).0
tie($t2) ~ (mu a. <(struct (field i32 (ref a.1))), (struct i64 (field (ref a.0)))>).1
```
where `<...>` denotes a type tuple. However, in our case, a single syntactic type variable `rec` is enough for all types, because recursive types cannot nest by construction.

Note 2: This semantics implies that type equivalence checks can be implemented in constant-time by representing all types as trees in tied form and canonicalising them bottom-up in linear time upfront.

> Note 3: It's worth noting that the only observable difference to a nominal type system is the equivalence rule on (non-recursive) type indices: instead of looking at their definitions, a nominal system would require `$t = $t'` syntactically (at least as long as we ignore things like checking imports, where type indices become meaningless).

Reviewer: Other differences are the presence of recursion groups and the restrictions on which type indices can be used in the definition of a type. Maybe it would be more useful to note here that having a single large recursion group essentially gives you a nominal system?

Author: The comment was referring to the difference in the rules. I reworded it to make that more explicit, and also added a sentence describing the practical consequence you mention.

#### Subtyping

##### Type Indices

In the [existing rules](https://github.com/WebAssembly/function-references/proposals/function-references/Overview.md#subtyping), subtyping on type indices required equivalence. Now it can take declared supertypes into account.

* Type indices are subtypes if they either define [equivalent](#type-equivalence) types or a suitable (direct or indirect) subtype relation has been declared
  - `$t <: $t'`

>     - if `$t = <ctxtype>` and `$t' = <ctxtype'>` and `<ctxtype> == <ctxtype'>`

Reviewer: Should these be `C($t)` and `C($t')`?

Author: See above.

```
$t1 = rect1t2.0
$t2 = rect1t2.1

where

rect1t2 = (rec
  (struct (field i32 (ref $t2)))
  (struct (field i64 (ref $t1)))
)
```
That is, the types are defined as projections from their respective recursion group, using their relative inner indices `0` and `1`.

#### Equivalence

Type equivalence, written `t == t'` here, is essentially defined inductively. All rules are simply the canonical congruences, with the exception of the rule for recursive types.

For the purpose of defining recursive type equivalence, type indices are extended with a special form that distinguishes regular from recursive type uses.

* `rec.<i>` is a new form of type index
  - `typeidx ::= ... | rec.<i>`

This form is only used during equivalence checking, to identify and represent "back edges" inside a recursive type. It is merely a technical device for formulating the rules and cannot appear in source code. It is introduced by the following auxiliary meta-function:

* Rolling a context type produces an _iso-recursive_ representation of its underlying recursion group
  - `tie($t)                    = tie_$t(<ctxtype>)`  iff `$t = <ctxtype>`
  - `tie_$t(<subtype>)          = <subtype>`

>   - `tie_$t((rec <subtype>*).i) = (rec <subtype>*).i[$t:=rec.0, ..., $t'+N:=rec.N]` iff `$t' = $t-i` and `N = |<subtype>*|`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `tie_$t((rec <subtype>*).i) = (rec <subtype>*).i[$t':=rec.0, ..., $t'+N:=rec.N]` iff `$t' = $t-i` and `N = |<subtype>*| - 1`
```
IIUC

    - where `unroll(<ctxttype>) = sub x* <strtype>`

#### Type Validity

Some of the rules define a type as `ok` for a certain index, written `ok(x)`. This controls uses of type indices as supertypes inside a recursive group: the subtype hierarchy must not be cyclic, and hence any type index used for a supertype is required to be smaller than the index `x` of the current type.

* a sequence of type definitions is valid if each item is valid within the context containing the prior items
  - `<typedef0> <typedef>* ok`
    - iff `<typedef0> ok` and extends the context accordingly
    - and `<typedef>* ok` under the extended context

* a plain type definition is valid if its `deftype` is at its type index
  - `<deftype> ok` and extends the context with `<deftype>`
    - iff `<deftype> ok($t)` where `$t` is the next unused (i.e., current) type index

* a recursive type definition is valid if its types are valid under the context containing all of them
  - `rec <deftype>* ok` and extends the context with `<ctxtype>*`
    - iff `<deftype>* ok($t)` under the extended context(!)
    - where `x` is the next unused (i.e., current) type index
    - and `N = |<deftype>*|-1`

>     - and `<deftype'>* = <deftype>*[$t:=rec $t, ..., $t+N:=rec $t+N]`

Reviewer 2: Should this read:
    - and `<deftype'>* = <deftype>*[$x:=rec $x, ..., $x+N:=rec $x+N]`
?

    - and `<ctxtype>*  = (rec <deftype'>*).0, ..., (rec <deftype'>*).N`
  - Note: `<deftype'>*` marks all recursive occurrences of type indices from within this group with `rec`; this is expressed here by a validation-time substitution, but an implementation could insert the annotations on the fly during decoding.
  - Because rec type indices `rec $t`cannot occur in the source, the following are invariants that are established by these rules:
    - (1) rec indices only occur in the context and inside a `(rec <deftype>*)`,
    - (2) they only refer to indices from the same recursive group,

>     - (3) all internal indices within a recursive group are marked with rec,

Reviewer 2: Does this imply that with rec <idx>, <idx> is in the range 0..N where there are N definitions in the rec <deftype> group?

  - `i31 <: eq`

* Any concrete type is a subtype of either `data` or `func`
  - `$t <: data`
     - if `$t = <structtype>` or `$t = <arraytype>`

>      - or `$t = type ht` and `ht <: data` (imports)

Reviewer: Are these lines referring to type imports? I know they were already in here, but let's remove them since we don't plan to have type imports in the MVP.

Author: Right, removed dependence on type imports.

  - Note: mutable fields are *not* subtypes of immutable ones, so `const` really means constant, not read-only

##### Type Definitions

Subtyping is not defined on type definitions.

### Runtime

#### Runtime Types

* Runtime types (RTTs) are explicit values representing concrete types at runtime; a value of type `rtt <typeidx>` is a dynamic representative of the static type `<typeidx>`.

* All RTTs are explicitly created and all operations involving dynamic type information (like casts) operate on explicit RTT operands. This allows maximum flexibility and custom choices wrt which RTTs to represent a source type.

* An RTT value r1 is *equal* to another RTT value r2 iff they both represent the same static type.

* An RTT value r1 is a *subtype* of another RTT value r2 iff they represent static types that are in a respective subtype relation.

> Note: RTT values correspond to type descriptors or "shape" objects as they exist in various engines. RTT equality can be implemented as a single pointer test by memoising RTT values. More interestingly, runtime casts along the hierachy encoded in these values can be implemented in an engine efficiently by using well-known techniques such as including a vector of its (direct and indirect) super-RTTs in each RTT value (with itself as the last entry). A subtype check between two RTT values can be implemented as follows using such a representation. Assume RTT value v1 has static type `(rtt $t1)` and v2 has type `(rtt $t2)`. Let `n1` and `n2` be the lenghts of the respective supertype vectors. To check whether v1 denotes a subtype RTT of v2, first verify that `n1 >= n2` -- if both `n1` and `n2` are known statically, this can be performed at compile time; if either is not statically known, it has to be read from the respective RTT value dynamically, and `n1 >= n2` becomes a dynamic check. Then compare v2 to the n2-th entry in v1's supertype vector. If they are equal, v1 is a subtype RTT.

Reviewer: A couple spelling fixes and remove the mention of n1 and n2 not being statically known.
```suggestion
Note: RTT values correspond to type descriptors or "shape" objects as they exist in various engines. RTT equality can be implemented as a single pointer test by memoising RTT values. More interestingly, runtime casts along the hierarchy encoded in these values can be implemented in an engine efficiently by using well-known techniques such as including a vector of its (direct and indirect) super-RTTs in each RTT value (with itself as the last entry). A subtype check between two RTT values can be implemented as follows using such a representation. Assume RTT value v1 has static type `(rtt $t1)` and v2 has type `(rtt $t2)`. Let `n1` and `n2` be the lengths of the respective supertype vectors. To check whether v1 denotes a subtype RTT of v2, first verify that `n1 >= n2` -- both `n1` and `n2` are known statically, so this can be performed at compile time. Then compare v2 to the n2-th entry in v1's supertype vector. If they are equal, v1 is a subtype RTT.
```

Author: Ah, but for casts the type `$t1` itself usually is not statically known (only a supertype of it), so neither is `n1`. I pushed a tweak that points that out.

* Provide functionality to generate fresh, non-canonical RTTs?

* Provide a way to make data types non-eq, especially immutable ones?

## Appendix: Formal Rules

### Validity

#### Type Indices (`C |- <typeidx> ok`)

```
C(x) = ct
---------
C |- x ok
```

#### Value Types (`C |- <valtype> ok`)

```

-----------
C |- i32 ok

C |- x ok
-------------
C |- ref x ok
```

...and so on.

#### Structural Types (`C |- <strtype> ok`)
```
(C |- t1 ok)*
(C |- t2 ok)*
--------------------
C |- func t1* t2* ok

(C |- ft ok)*
------------------
C |- struct ft* ok

C |- ft ok
----------------
C |- array ft ok
```

#### Defined Types (`C |- <subtype>* ok(x)`)

```
C |- st ok
(C |- st <: expand(C(x)))*
(x < x')*
--------------------------
C |- sub x* st ok(x')

C |- dt ok(x)
C |- dt'* ok(x+1)
-------------------

> C |- dt dt'* ok(x)

Reviewer: What is this rule doing? I don't understand what `dt` and `dt'*` are.

```

> #### Type Definitions (`C |- <deftype>* -| C'`)

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with this reverse turnstile syntax. What does it mean?

Author: Oh, actually, that should be `st` and `st*`. Will fix.

```
C |- dt ok(|C|)
---------------
C |- dt -| C,dt

x = |C|    N = |dt*|-1
C' = C,(rec dt*).0,...,(rec dt*).N
C' |- dt* ok(x)
-------------------------------------
C |- rec dt* -| C'

C |- td -| C'
C' |- td'* ok
---------------
C |- td td'* ok
```

#### Instructions (`C |- <instr> : [t1*] -> [t2*]`)

```
expand(C(x)) = func t1* t2*
---------------------------------------
C |- func.call : [t1* (ref x)] -> [t2*]

expand(C(x)) = struct t1^i t t2*
------------------------------------
C |- struct.get i : [(ref x)] -> [t]
```

...and so on

### Type Equivalence

#### Type Indices (`C |- <typeidx> == <typeidx'>`)

```
C |- tie(x) == tie(x')
----------------------
C |- x == x'

--------------------
C |- rec.i == rec.i
```

#### Value Types (`C |- <valtype> == <valtype'>`)

```

---------------
C |- i32 == i32

C |- x == x'
null? = null'?
---------------------------------
C |- ref null? x == ref null'? x'
```

...and so on.

#### Field Types (`C |- <fldtype> == <fldtype'>`)

```
C |- t == t'
--------------------
C |- mut t == mut t'
```

> #### Structural Types (`C |- <strtype> == <strtype'>`)

Reviewer: What is the difference between a structural type and a defined type?

Reviewer: I see, a `deftype` is a type section entry defined as `<subtype> | rec <subtype>*`, so type section entries can either be on their own (like the current function types) or inside a `rec` group. A `subtype` is a single type definition, whether it is on its own or in a `rec` group.

```
(C |- t1 == t1')*
(C |- t2 == t2')*
------------------------------------
C |- func t1* t2* == func t1'* t2'*

(C |- ft == ft')*
----------------------------
C |- struct ft* == struct ft'*

C |- ft == ft'
--------------------------

> C |- arrat ft == array ft'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C |- array ft == array ft'
```

```

#### Defined Types (`C |- <subtype> == <subtype'>`)

```
(C |- x == x')*
C |- st == st'
-----------------------------
C |- sub x* st == sub x'* st'
```

### Subtyping

#### Type Indices (`C |- <typeidx> <: <typeidx'>`)

```
C |- x == x'
------------
C |- x <: x'

unroll(C(x)) = sub (x1* x'' x2*) st

> C |- x'' <: x'

Reviewer: Would there be any downside to putting subtype depth into the syntax (optionally?) so subtype checks can be constant time rather than linear like we currently do with RTTs?

Author: Unless you consider subtype constraints on type imports (which is not included here), the depth is implicit in the definition, since all supertype definitions are fully transparent.

For imports, it may be worth considering some restrictions, e.g., putting the depth in the constraint, but I'd look at that separately.

Reviewer: Makes sense, thanks.
